
# `covdepGE:` Covariate Dependent Graph Estimation

## Installation

Run the following in `R`:

`devtools::install_github("JacobHelwig/covdepGE")`

## Overview

Suppose that `X` is a `p`-dimensional data `matrix` with `n`
observations and that `Z` is a `q`-dimensional extraneous covariate,
also with `n` observations, where the `l`-th observation in `Z` is
associated with the `l`-th observation in `X`. Further suppose that the
`l`-th row of `X` follows a `p`-dimensional Gaussian distribution with
mean `0` and precision matrix `Omega(z_l)`, where `z_l` is the `l`-th
entry of `Z` and `Omega` is a continuous function mapping from the space
of extraneous covariates to the space of `p` `x` `p` non-singular
matrices. Then, for the `l`-th observation, the (`j`,`k`) entry of
`Omega(z_l)` is non-zero if, and only if, variable `j` and variable `k`
are dependent given the remaining variables in `X`.

Given data satisfying these assumptions, the `covdepGE` function employs
the algorithm described in (1) to estimate a graphical representation of
the structure of `Omega` for each of the observations in `X` as a
continuous function of `Z`. This graph contains an undirected edge
between two variables `X_j` and `X_k` if, and only if, `X_j` and `X_k`
are conditionally dependent given the remaining variables.

## Graph Estimation

Graphs are constructed by fixing each of the columns `X_j` of `X` as the
response and performing a spike-and-slab regression using the remaining
variables `X_k` in `X` as predictors. To determine if an edge should be
added between `X_j` and `X_k`, the posterior inclusion probability of
`X_k` in a regression with `X_j` fixed as the response (`PIP(X_k)`) and
vice versa (`PIP(X_j)`) are symmetrized according to `sym_method` (e.g.,
by taking the mean of `PIP(X_j)` and `PIP(X_k)`). If the symmetrized PIP
is greater than `edge_threshold`, an edge will be included between `X_j`
and `X_k`.

To model `Omega` as a function of `Z`, `n` weighted spike-and-slab
regressions are performed for each variable `X_j` fixed as the response.
The similarity weights for the `l`-th regression are taken with respect
to observation `l` such that observations having similar values of `Z`
will have larger weights.

## Variational Inference

Spike-and-slab posterior quantities are estimated using a variational
approximation. Coordinate Ascent Variational Inference (CAVI) is
performed for each of the weighted regressions to select the variational
parameters that maximize the ELBO. The parameters for each of the
regression coefficients are the mean and variance of the slab (`mu` and
`ssq_var`, respectively) and the probability that the coefficient is
non-zero (`alpha`).

CAVI for the `n` regressions is performed simultaneously for variable
`X_j` fixed as the response. With each of the `n` sets of `alpha` as the
rows of an `n` `x` (`p-1`) `matrix`, the CAVI for variable `X_j` is
ended for all `n` regressions when the Frobenius norm of the change in
the `alpha` `matrix` is less than `alpha_tol` or after `max_iter`
iterations of CAVI have been performed.

Note that since the regressions performed for variable `X_j` and `X_k`
fixed as the response are independent of each other, they may be
performed in parallel by setting `parallel = T`. Registering parallel
backend with greater than `p` workers offers no benefit, since each
worker takes on one variable to fix as the response and perform the `n`
regressions.

## Hyperparameter specification

Each regression requires the specification of 3 hyperparameters: `pi`
(the prior probability of inclusion), `sigma^2` (the prior residual
variance), and `sigma_beta^2` (the prior variance of the slab).
`covdepGE` offers 3 methods for hyperparameter specification via the
`hp_method` argument: `grid_search`, `model_average`, and `hybrid`.
Empirically, `grid search` offers the best sensitivity and
`model_average` offers the best specificity, while `hybrid` sits between
the other two methods in both metrics.

The hyperparameter candidate grid is generated by taking the Cartesian
product between `ssq`, `sbsq`, and `pip` (candidate values for
`sigma^2`, `sigma_beta^2`, and `pi`, respectively). Each of the methods
gives an approach for selecting points from this grid.

In `grid_search`, the point from the grid that produces the model that
has the greatest total ELBO is selected, where the total ELBO is
calculated by summing the ELBO for each of the `n` regressions for a
variable `X_j` fixed as the response. Thus, all observations use the
same set of hyperparameters for the regression on `X_j`.

Instead of selecting only one model as in `grid_search`, models are
averaged over in `model_average`. With `X_j` fixed as the response, the
unnormalized weights for each grid point used to perform this averaging
is calculated by exponentiating the ELBO for each of the `n`
regressions. Note that since the ELBO for a given grid point will vary
across the `n` regressions due to differing similarity weights, each of
the `n` sets of averaging weights will be unique.

Finally, `hybrid` combines `grid_search` and `model_average`. Fixing
`X_j` as the response, for each `pi` candidate in `pip`, the point in
the grid defined by the Cartesian product of `ssq` and `sbsq` is
selected by maximizing the total ELBO summed across the `n` regressions.
The resulting models for each of the `pi` candidates are then averaged
using the exponentiated ELBO for each of the `n` regressions as the
unnormalized averaging weights.

Note that in the search step of `grid_search` and `hybrid`, CAVI for
each of the candidates is performed for at most `max_iter_grid`
iterations. A second CAVI is then performed for `max_iter` iterations
using the `n` models that maximized the total ELBO in the first step.
Setting `max_iter_grid` to be less than `max_iter` (as is the default)
will result in a more efficient search.

## Candidate grid generation

The candidate grids (`ssq`, `sbsq`, and `pip`) may be passed as
arguments, however, by default, these grids are generated automatically.
Each of the grids are spaced uniformly between an upper end point and a
lower end point. The number of points in each grid is `5` by default.
Grids include end points, and the number of points in each grid is
controlled by the arguments `nssq`, `nsbsq`, and `npip`. The lower
endpoints (`ssq_lower`, `sbsq_lower`, and `pip_lower`) are all `1e-5` by
default. The upper endpoints are calculated dependent on the variable
`X_j` fixed as the response.

`ssq_upper` is simply the variance of `X_j` times `ssq_mult`. By
default, `ssq_mult` is `1.5`.

`pip_upper` is calculated by regressing the remaining variables on `X_j`
using LASSO. The shrinkage hyperparameter for LASSO is chosen to be
`lambda.1se`. The number of non-zero coefficients estimated by LASSO is
then divided by `p-1` to calculate `pip_upper`. Note that if the LASSO
estimate to the number of non-zero coefficients is `0` or `p-1`, this
estimate is changed to `1` or `p-2` (respectively) to ensure that
`pip_upper` is greater than `0` and less than `1`.

Finally, an upper bound is induced on `sigma_beta^2` by deriving a rough
upper bound for the signal-to-noise ratio that depends on
`sigma_beta^2`. Let `sum_S^2` be the sum of the sample variances of the
columns of the predictors `X’`. Under the simplifying assumptions that
the expected values of `X’` and the spike-and-slab regression
coefficients `beta` are `0` and that `X’` and `beta` are independent,
the variance of the dot product of `X’` with `beta` is
`pi*sigma^2*sigma_beta^2*sum_S^2`. Thus, the signal-to-noise ratio under
these assumptions is given by `pi*sigma_beta^2*sum_S^2`, and so
replacing `pi` with `pip_upper` and `sigma_beta^2` with `sbsq_upper`
gives an upper bound on the signal-to-noise ratio. Setting this bound
equal to `snr_upper` gives an expression for `sbsq_upper`.

## Similarity Weights

The similarity weight for individual `k` with respect to individual `l`
is calculated as `dnorm(Norm(z_l, z_k), tau_l`), where `Norm(z_l, z_k)`
denotes the norm (specified by the `norm` argument) of the values of `Z`
for the `l`-th and `k`-th observations, and `tau_l` is the bandwidth for
the `l`-th observation. `tau` may be passed as an argument, however, by
default, it is estimated using the methodology given in (2). (2)
describes a two-step approach for density estimation, where in the first
step, an initial estimate is calculated using Silverman’s rule of thumb
for initializing bandwidth values, and in the second step, the density
is refined by updating the bandwidth values. This methodology is used
here to estimate the density of `Z`, and the updated bandwidths from the
second step are used for `tau`.

## Bibliography

1.  Dasgupta S., Ghosh P., Pati D., Mallick B., *An approximate Bayesian
    approach to covariate dependent graphical modeling*, 2021

2.  Dasgupta S., Pati D., Srivastava A., *A Two-Step Geometric Framework
    For Density Modeling*, Statistica Sinica, 2020

## Demo

``` r
library(covdepGE)
library(ggplot2)
```

    ## Warning: package 'ggplot2' was built under R version 4.1.3

``` r
# get the data
set.seed(12)
data <- generateData()
X <- data$data
Z <- data$covts
interval <- data$interval
prec <- data$true_precision

# get overall and within interval sample sizes
n <- nrow(X)
n1 <- sum(interval == 1)
n2 <- sum(interval == 2)

# visualize the distribution of the extraneous covariate
ggplot(data.frame(Z = Z, interval = as.factor(interval))) +
  geom_histogram(aes(Z, fill = interval), color = "black", bins = n %/% 5)
```

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-1-1.png)<!-- -->

``` r
# visualize the true precision matrices in each of the intervals

# interval 1
matViz(prec[[1]], incl_val = T) + ggtitle("True precision matrix, interval 1")
```

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-1-2.png)<!-- -->

``` r
# interval 2 (varies continuously with Z)
int2_mats <- prec[interval == 2]
int2_inds <- c(5, n2 %/% 2, n2 - 5)
lapply(int2_inds, function(j) matViz(int2_mats[[j]], incl_val = T) +
         ggtitle(paste("True precision matrix, interval 2, individual", j)))
```

    ## [[1]]

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-1-3.png)<!-- -->

    ## 
    ## [[2]]

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-1-4.png)<!-- -->

    ## 
    ## [[3]]

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-1-5.png)<!-- -->

``` r
# interval 3
matViz(prec[[length(prec)]], incl_val = T) +
  ggtitle("True precision matrix, interval 3")
```

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-1-6.png)<!-- -->

``` r
# fit the model and visualize the estimated precision matrices
(out <- covdepGE(X, Z))
```

    ##   |                                                                              |                                                                      |   0%  |                                                                              |==============                                                        |  20%  |                                                                              |============================                                          |  40%  |                                                                              |==========================================                            |  60%  |                                                                              |========================================================              |  80%  |                                                                              |======================================================================| 100%

    ##                       Covariate Dependent Graphical Model
    ## 
    ## ELBO: -171501.68                                             # Unique Graphs: 3
    ## n: 180, variables: 5                       Hyperparameter grid size: 125 points
    ## Model fit completed in 7.422 secs

``` r
plot(out)
```

    ## [[1]]

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-1-7.png)<!-- -->

    ## 
    ## [[2]]

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-1-8.png)<!-- -->

    ## 
    ## [[3]]

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-1-9.png)<!-- -->

``` r
# visualize the posterior inclusion probabilities for variables (1, 3) and (1, 2)
inclusionCurve(out, 1, 2)
```

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-1-10.png)<!-- -->

``` r
inclusionCurve(out, 1, 3)
```

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-1-11.png)<!-- -->
